We will look at one of the most
basic and well-known models
of strategy and management.
These are the general strategies of
Michael Porter.
It is a model that is born
in the mid-1980s and has
influenced all literature,
all knowledge, all knowledge
that is studied in business
schools.
It is a very useful tool that
is aimed at helping us
understand what alternatives
or decisions a company
has to make about how to
compete.
And because it is very simple and because
it is applicable to a vast majority
of cases, it has had that huge spread.
Let's see what Michael Porter
says.
Michael Porter says there
are only two sources
of competitive advantage.
Only two.
And it is that you have to choose between
differentiation, that is, between
being the best in something,
between incorporating some feature to
your proposal to value that customers
value and are willing to
pay for it, you don't have to
be better in everything, right?
You have to be better at something,
something your customers perceive.
That is the number one
alternative.
And the second is to be a cost
leader, that is, to be able to produce
or provide services at a lower
cost than your competitors.
That doesn't mean you are the cheapest.
It can be the cheapest, but
also what you can choose is to have
more margins, right?
These are the two alternatives, the
two sources of competitive advantage.
This is the competitive
strategy of Michael
Porter.
As we see, in the axis of the X we
have to choose between cost leadership
and between differentiation.
And there is another decision that is
depending on the scope to which we
are going to go.
Whether we are going to target the
entire market, all segments of the
market, or what we are going to do
is focus on one part of that
market in a segment.
Then, from those two axes, from
those two dimensions, we
have the generic strategies.
Sometimes they say they are three,
and sometimes they say they
are four.
They are mainly leading in cost,
differentiation and segmentation.
Let's see one by one.
Leadership in cost.
You can choose to be the cost leader
in your market.
They are usually companies that are
leaders in the entire market.
Why is it?
Because to be a cost leader, it
helps to size, economics of scale.
A good example is Ryanair.
Ryanair is the cost leader in
the airline sector.
As we will see in the next
class, this requires, it has very
many implications in the model and
in the management of your business.
Being a cost leader requires you
to take, requires a real commitment
to saving costs across
the value chain.
You can choose differentiation and it'
s to incorporate some
feature that allows you to get your
customers to buy you for that, right?
In this case, we are also
talking about the entire
market.
In the airline sector, we could
clearly, there are several examples,
but American Airlines is
one of them.
In addition, even the mission
of American Airlines, which they
say is very clear, are
transmitting that they have opted
for a differentiation strategy.
No one chooses American Airlines for its
price, right?
They choose it for the value they perceive.
Finally, we have the
segmentation strategy.
The main difference with the above
is that in this case you do what
you do is focus on one single segment
within the market.
Your target market is smaller, but
as you are focusing on a smaller
segment, it allows you to
generate certain advantages
in that segment over those
that target the entire market
because you know it better.
You can better adapt to
the needs, problems, etc.,
of that segment, right?
Usually, this, the fact of focusing
on just one segment, is not
usually enough.
You have to choose between being
a cost leader or being
differentiated.
And an example, in this case, would
be segmentation and differentiation
NetJets, which is a company with
a very curious value proposal that
what it does is rent space
on private jets for large
corporations.
Therefore, it has segmented only large
corporations, which are, mainly their
customers are large corporations,
and in addition it differentiates,
the competitive advantage you are looking
for is differentiation, right?
Customers choose NetJets by value.
Well, as we have said before,
the key to generic strategies is
that they allow us to choose,
and companies have to make
decisions and have to be
brave and committed to the decisions
they make.
And what happens, and happens
too often, is that there are many
companies that, not having this clear,
in the end what they do is, as they
call it in English, stacking in
the middle, they stay in the middle,
they are not, they are not looking
to be the leaders in cost, nor are they
really focused on offering differentiation,
etc., and they stay in
the middle.
And what they get, in the end, the
consequence is that they have, instead
of a competitive advantage, they have
a competitive disadvantage, because
they compete in a market where
some customers choose the cheapest,
other customers choose the
best and they are in the middle.
And I'm going to use an expression
I've heard several times in the mouth
of Víctor Costa, who was one of
his companions and had the luck
to learn a lot of things from him.
He used the term shock.
I think it is very representative of this.
We saw many companies that, in the
end, what happened was that
they were, with what we said,
stacking in the middle, had not
decided, had no clear what their
strategy was and offered
neither chocolate nor chili.
And what they offered was shock,
which is a scorn.
And, at the end of the day, no one buys
them because they have a disadvantage,
right?
Let us make a final summary.
The Maiker Porter model of
generic strategies helps us
make decisions, helps us choose
whether we will compete trying
to be the cost leaders, that
is, have the production cost
lower than the rest, which
allows us to have higher margins.
Or to reduce prices and
gain market share.
We have to decide whether we want to
be the best in something.
Or we can also choose to
focus on one of the niches or
one of the segments within
the market, establish closer
rations with that niche and
try to better meet your needs
exactly because we
are focused on it.
The point is that you have to choose.
And we have to make a decision, we
have to commit to that decision,
because the entire management
of the company, the business
model, etc., will be affected
by that decision that we take.
This is what we will see in the next class.